.Dd August 21, 2025
.Dt NOVEL 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm novel
.Nd terminal reader for novels with an interactive TUI (novels, chapters, reading view)
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a full-screen terminal application that lets you browse novels stored in a local
SqLite
database, pick chapters, and read them in a scrollable, colorized view. It uses
Crossterm and Ratatui for the TUI and stores local progress so it can remember
the chapter and scroll position you were reading last.
.Pp
The application has three modes:
.Bl -tag -width "ChapterContent"
.It Novels
List all novels. Use
.Sy j/k ,
mousewheel,
.Sy Home/End ,
or
.Sy PageUp/PageDown
to move,
.Sy Enter
or
.Sy l
to select,
.Sy q
to quit.
.It Chapters
List chapters for the selected novel, with optional live search. Use
.Sy /
to start a search (type to filter by chapter
.Em id
or title; case-insensitive),
.Sy Enter
to apply,
.Sy Esc
to cancel,
.Sy j/k ,
mousewheel,
.Sy gg/G ,
or
.Sy Home/End
to move,
.Sy Enter
or
.Sy l
to read,
.Sy h
to go back to Novels,
.Sy q
to quit.
.It ChapterContent
Read the selected chapter. Use
.Sy j/k
to scroll by 3 lines,
.Sy mousewheel
to scroll by the configured mouse step,
.Sy Space/PageDown
and
.Sy Backspace/PageUp
to page,
.Sy gg/Home
for top,
.Sy G/End
for bottom,
.Sy l
or left click
for next chapter,
.Sy h
or right click
for previous chapter,
.Sy m
to bookmark the current position,
.Sy B
to open the bookmark popup,
.Sy b
back to Chapters,
.Sy q
to quit.
.El
.Sh KEYBINDINGS
.Bl -tag -width 10n
.It Sy Global
.Sy q
\- quit current view (from Novels/Chapters/Reading).
.It Sy Novels view
.Sy j/k
move selection,
.Sy mousewheel
move selection,
.Sy Home/End
first/last novel,
.Sy PageUp/PageDown
page through novels,
.Sy Enter Ns / Ns Sy l
select novel.
.It Sy Chapters view
.Sy /
start search input;
type to filter (by chapter
.Em id
or substring of title, case-insensitive);
.Sy Backspace
delete one character;
.Sy Enter
apply filter and keep list;
.Sy Esc
cancel search, clear input, and restore the pre-search selection;
.Sy j/k
move;
.Sy mousewheel
move;
.Sy gg/G
or
.Sy Home/End
first/last chapter;
.Sy Enter Ns / Ns Sy l
open chapter;
.Sy h
back to Novels;
.Sy q
quit.
.It Sy Reading view
.Sy j/k
scroll by 3 lines;
.Sy mousewheel
scroll by configured mouse step;
.Sy d/Ctrl+D
scroll down by the configured half-page step;
.Sy u/Ctrl+U
scroll up by the configured half-page step;
.Sy Space/PageDown
page down;
.Sy Backspace/PageUp
page up;
.Sy gg/Home
top;
.Sy G/End
bottom;
.Sy l
or left click
next chapter (wraps to first when at end);
.Sy h
or right click
previous chapter (wraps from first to last);
.Sy m
save bookmark at current chapter and scroll;
.Sy B
open bookmark popup
.Pq Sy j/k
move,
.Sy Enter
jump,
.Sy d
delete,
.Sy Esc
close;
.Sy b
back to Chapters;
.Sy q
quit.
.El
.Sh DISPLAY AND COLOR
.Nm
formats HTML-ish chapter content into plain text (converting
.Pa <p>
and
.Pa <br>
to newlines, stripping other tags, and decoding HTML entities). It also normalizes
common “smart” punctuation to ASCII for consistent matching.
.Pp
Some inline highlighting rules:
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Double-quoted spans are highlighted (e.g., dialogue).
.It
Whole-line single-quoted text is highlighted differently (e.g., epigraphs).
.It
Bracketed attributes like
.Sq [note]
are highlighted.
.It
Lines starting with
.Sq ...
or an ellipsis are emphasized; lines of
.Sq ***
are dimmed.
.It
Configured literal highlight groups from
.Pa config.toml
are applied outside dialogue and bracketed spans. Groups can be global or scoped
to a novel profile by id or title substring.
.It
Suspiciously mismatched quotes are shown with a warning color.
.El
.Pp
Colorization is always on in the current implementation.
.Pp
The reading footer reports the currently visible rendered line range, for example
.Dq lines 27-70/70 ,
so the bottom of a chapter shows the whole visible page instead of only the first
line at the top of the viewport.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width 24n
.It Pa ../db/novel.db
SqLite database file searched relative to the program's working directory.
Contains tables
.Dq novels
and
.Dq chapters
(with a
.Dq reading_now
field). When you open or advance a chapter, the app sets the current chapter's
.Em reading_now
to 1 for that novel and clears it for others.
.It Pa reading-progress.json
Local progress file stored under the platform data directory by default, or at
.Ev READERTUI_PROGRESS_FILE
when set. It stores per-novel chapter id, scroll position, and bookmarks.
.It Pa readertui-debug.log
Optional debug log written only when
.Sy [debug].enabled
is true in
.Pa config.toml
or
.Ev READERTUI_DEBUG_LOG
is set.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Dl novel
Open the TUI, select a novel with
.Sy Enter ,
then a chapter with
.Sy Enter ,
read with
.Sy j/k
or the mousewheel,
switch chapters with
.Sy h/l .
.Pp
In the Chapters view:
.Dl /
Start search mode, type part of a chapter title (case-insensitive),
then press
.Sy Enter
to apply, or
.Sy Esc
to cancel.
.Sh NOTES
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
The search matches chapter
.Em id
(digit substring) or a case-insensitive substring of the chapter title.
.It
Scrolling in Reading view moves 3 lines per
.Sy j
or
.Sy k .
.It
Numeric prefixes are supported for repeated reader/list motions, such as
.Sy 12j
or
.Sy 3l .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr less 1 ,
.Xr bat 1 ,
.Xr sqlite3 1
.Sh AUTHORS
Your Name
.Aq your@email.example
.Sh BUGS
Report issues at your project tracker or repository.
